.Dd October 20, 2024
.Dt LDAPFMT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ldapfmt
.Nd template driven formatter for LDAP queries
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ldapfmt
.Op Fl h | V | Z
.Op Fl D Ar binddn
.Op Fl H Ar uri ...
.Op Fl b Ar searchbase
.Op Fl w Ar password
.Op Fl Y Ar mech
.Op Ar template
.Op Ar args ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
takes as input a Jinja2 template containing LDAP queries and formats the
result. It can be used as a script interpreter by starting the template with a
shebang line.
.Pp
This has a variety of uses ranging from expanding group membership for tools
that have limited support for LDAP groups, producing reports for web pages to
looking up values for use with the
.Ql AuthorizedKeysCommand
and similar options of
.Xr sshd 8 .
.Pp
By default, the OpenLDAP configuration file is used to set defaults for making
LDAP connections but the following command-line options, corresponding to those
of
.Xr ldapsearch 1 ,
are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl H
Specify LDAP URI(s) to connect to. Either a comma or a space can be used to
separate multiple URIs.
.It Fl D Ar binddn
Specify bind DN.
.It Fl b Ar searchbase
Specify search base.
.It Fl w Ar password
Specify the password for simple authentication. Note that command arguments can
be visible to other users such as in process listings so this should only be
used advisedly.
.It Fl Y Ar {gssapi|external|simple}
Specify the SASL mechanism to be used for authentication.
.It Fl Z
Issue StartTLS extended operation.
.It Fl h
Show a brief usage summary of the program.
.It Fl V
Show version of program.
.El
.Sh FUNCTIONS
The minijinja implementaton of Jinja2 is used and any of the builtin functions
and filters defined by that are available. In addition, the following
additional functions are defined:
.Pp
.Fo search
.Fa filter ,
.Op Fa attribute, ...
.Fc
.Bd -offset indent
Perform an LDAP search with the given filter and return the results as a list
of dictionaries. Each attribute is also returned as a list because LDAP
attributes can have multiple values. Where only one value is expected, use a filter such as
.Ql first
to extract the value. If the list of attributes is ommitted, all attributes are
returned. The distinguished name (dn) of each entry is also included
in the attributes. There can only be one value for this field but it is
returned as a single-element list for consistency.
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn args
.Bd -offset indent
Returns the remaining command-line arguments that follow the template filename
as a list.
.Ed
.Pp
.Fo error
.Fa message
.Fc
.Bd -offset indent
Prints an error message and exits with a non-zero status.
.Ed
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
The following are some simple examples. The
.Pa sample
directory in the source distribution contains a number of more complex examples.
.Pp
Find all groups that a user has delegated management of.
.Pp
.Be -literal
{{ search("(memberManager=uid=" + args() | first + ",*)",
    ["cn", "memberManager" ])
  | map(attribute='cn')
  | sort
  | map('join', '\\n')
  | join('\\n') }}
.Ed
.Pp
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width 6n
.It Pa /etc/openldap/ldap.conf
.Nm
loads the OpenLDAP configuration to apply defaults for making
connections to the LDAP server.
.El
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr ldapsearch 1 ,
.Xr ldap.conf 5 ,
.Xr sshd_config 5
